---
layout: post
title:  "Application Programming Interface (API)"
categories: post
---

If you have been a regular computer user, you've probably heard of an API; mostly REST - Representational State Transfer. An API is an abbreviation for Application Programming Interface.

An API exposes the functionality without exposing the internals. An API enables companies to open up their applications' data and functionality to external third-party developers, business partners, and internal departments within their company. This allows services and products to communicate with each other through a documented interface. 
Developers do not need to know how the API is implemented; they simply use the interface to communicate with other products and services. 

#### Key principles and architectural constraints for REST APIs. 

1. Client-Server
	* The separation of the user interface from the backend application. 

2. Stateless 
	* Information needed for a request is provided without providing a context - Sessions are therefore maintained on the client. 

3. Cacheable 
	* Response data is declared explicitly as cacheable or not. 

4. Uniform Interface
	* Identification of resources
	* Manipulation of resources through representations 
	* Self-descriptive messages
	* Hypermedia as the engine of application state. 

5. Layered system
	* Each path in an API is independent of another and cannot "see" beyond. 

6. Code on demand
	* Allowing download of resources like applets for additional functionality. 

Taking on functions or methods, they work the same as an API.

Let's take an example of a javascript function.

	function add(num1, num2){
		return a+b;
	}

    add (2+3); // call the function

Calling the function, example, with 2 and 3 as parameters respectively will return 5.

This is a simple js function that receives two numbers (num1 and num2) as parameters, it adds the two numbers and returns their sum. 

A system user doesn't have to worry about how the function id doing to the parameters you pass, he justa ppareciates the outcome.  

That's all an API does/is. An API could be a function you wrote, a function from a library or method from a freamework or even an http endpoint. 

Useful resources:- REST API Tutorial - https://www.restapitutorial.com/
	
Understanding and Using REST APIs - Smashing Magazine - https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2018/01/understanding-using-rest-api/

Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures - a thesis by Roy Fielding - https://www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.html